Public docs for app startup and UI load auto instrumentation (#175)
embrace-io/embrace-docs: docs/android/features/performance-instrumentation.md

---
title: Performance Auto Instrumentation

> description: Automatically capture the performance of various aspects of the app

Reviewer: This feels a bit vague. Are we naming the feature this publicly? I'd suggest something that narrowly defines what it does: e.g. auto instrumentation of UI lifecycle/navigation, and we should discuss that internally if that requires renaming the feature

Author: I think we are going to put more auto instrumentation stuff in here, but let me confirm with Eliab. I wouldn't want a separate page for each platform or core library instrumentation tbh

Author: Eliab says go with this for now

sidebar_position: 16
---

# Performance Auto Instrumentation

## Overview

> The Embrace SDK is able to automatically instrument key workflows as the app goes through its operational lifecycle. The instrumentation generates traces (root span and child spans) similar to the spans that are created when using the [Performance Tracing](/android/features/traces/) API. They will appear in the Embrace UI and be exported via the configured `SpanExporter` just like any other span.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Embrace SDK can automatically instrument key workflows as the app goes through its operational lifecycle. The instrumentation generates traces (root span and child spans) similar to the spans that are created when using the [Performance Tracing](/android/features/traces/) API. They will appear in the Embrace UI and be exported via the configured `SpanExporter` just like any other span.
```

Cold startups generate a trace with a root span called `emb-cold-time-to-initial-display`. On modern versions of Android, this trace begins when we can best estimate when the process is created for use by the app instance. It will end when the first frame of the designated Activity has been fully rendered. 

On Android version 6.x or earlier, the trace will start when the Embrace SDK starts, which is recommended to be the first line of the `onCreate()` method of the app's `Application` object.

Warm startups generate a trace with a root span called `emb-warm-time-to-initial-display`. This trace begins at our estimate of when the designated Activity creation begins. It will end when the first frame of the designated Activity has been fully rendered.

For Android version 9 or earlier, both types of app startup traces will end when the designated Activity reaches the `RESUMED` state of its lifecycle.

### Configuration

App startup traces can be augmented in the following ways to add additional data particular to your app:

- Custom attributes
- Custom child spans
- Application object creation completion
- Ignore splash or trampoline Activities on startup

> Note: Be mindful of when these customization methods are invoked. Doing so on a background thread or at a time when it is not certain whether app startup has completed may result in the customization not being recorded.

Reviewer: Is there any sort of warning logged if a user attempts this on a background thread? Or could we add a `UiThread` annotation to the public API?

Author: I don't want to take that option away because it's useful to be able to do that and not incur extra time on the main thread. If we start seeing a lot of complaints, maybe we'll be a little sterner in the warning. But I think this is sufficient for now.

#### Custom attributes

Custom span attributes can be added to the root span of the trace by using the `addStartupTraceAttribute()` method before startup has completed.

#### Custom child spans

Custom child spans can be added to the root span of the trace during app startup by using the `addStartupTraceAttribute()` method. Parameters for the name, start time, and end time must be specified, while optional parameters for attributes, span events, and error code may also be specified to further customize the span.

To ensure the timestamps of the custom spans are in sync with the timestamps of the other spans in the trace, use the `getSdkCurrentTimeMs()` method to obtain it from the same clock instance the SDK uses. This instance is locked after the SDK starts up and will not change even if the system clock changes.

#### Application object create completion notification

> It's difficult to programmatically determine precisely when the app's application object has been created, but the `applicationInitEnd()` method can be called to notify the SDK of when this happens, which will allow it to more accurately assess whether an app startup is cold or warm.

Reviewer: Is it difficult for us or for end-users? I'd have naively thought it would be a case of this:

```
class MyApp: Application() {
     private val loaded = Embrace.getInstance().applicationInitEnd()`
}
```

Author: Oh you're right - it's difficult for the SDK - trivial for customers. This is why this is here. Let me modify this.

#### Bypassing interstitial activities during app startup

For any interstitial Activities that are opened before the actual Activity whose load completes the launch of the app, annotate them with the `@StartupActivity` annotation so that they will be skipped for the purposes of app startup tracking.

### Code Example

> The following sample `Application` will add a custom span and attribute to the app startup trace. It will also inform the SDK of when the application object has finished beign created.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following sample `Application` will add a custom span and attribute to the app startup trace. It will also inform the SDK of when the application object has finished being created.
```

For loads where the Activity object has already been created, a trace with a root span named `emb-{Activity Name}-hot-time-to-initial-display` will be generated, where `{Activity Name}` is the fully-qualified class name of the Activity that was loaded. This generally happens when an already launched app gets foregrounded.

This trace begins at our best estimate of when Activity begins to enter the `STARTED` stage of its lifecycle. It ends at our best estimate of when the Activity has reached the `RESUMED` stage of its lifecycle.

Note: navigation using Jetpack Compose Navigation component should also generate a "hot" Activity Load trace.

### Configuration

Activity Load traces can be augmented in the following ways to add additional data particular to your app:

- Custom end event
- Custom attributes
- Custom child spans
- Configure Activities to be instrumented

Note: Be mindful of when these customization methods are invoked. Doing so on a background thread or at a time when it is not certain whether the Activity load has completed may result in the customization not being recorded.

#### Custom end event

> If you don't want to consider when the UI first loads as the end time for your Activity load traces, you can end it with manually instead by invoking the `activityLoad()` method.n This is useful, for instance, if you want to end the trace when `reportFullyDrawn()` is reported for the Activity. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you don't want to consider when the UI first loads as the end time for your Activity load traces, you can end it with manually instead by invoking the `activityLoad()` method. This is useful, for instance, if you want to end the trace when `reportFullyDrawn()` is reported for the Activity. 
```

To use this configuration, annotate the Activity class with `@CustomLoadTracedActivity`.

For Activities with this annotation, the SDK will wait for the `activityLoaded()` method to be invoked with the Activity instance as its parameter. The trace is considered abandoned if the user navigates away from the Activity before this method is invoked, so ensure all code paths that lead to a successful load will call this.

Activities annotated this way will always be traced unless the entire Activity Load feature is disabled.

:::tip
To prevent memory leaks, do not cache your Activity instance in a member variable that will not be cleaned up once your Activity instance is destroyed.
:::

#### Custom attributes

Custom span attributes can be added to the root span of the trace by using the `addLoadTraceAttribute()` method before the Activity load is completed or abandoned.

#### Custom child spans

> Custom child spans can be added to the root span of the trace by using the `addLoadTraceChildSpan()`  method before the Activity load is completed or abandoned.. Parameters for the name, start time, and end time must be specified, while optional parameters for attributes, span events, and error code may also be specified to customize the span.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Custom child spans can be added to the root span of the trace by using the `addLoadTraceChildSpan()`  method before the Activity load is completed or abandoned. Parameters for the name, start time, and end time must be specified, while optional parameters for attributes, span events, and error code may also be specified to customize the span.
```

To ensure the timestamps of the custom spans are in sync with the timestamps of the other spans in the trace, use the `getSdkCurrentTimeMs()` method to obtain it from the same clock instance the SDK uses. This clock instance is locked after the SDK starts up and will not change even if the system clock changes.

#### Configure Activities to be instrumented

> The default configuration of the SDK is to trace the loading of all Activities after app startup, cold or warm. If you do not wish to use this instrumentation, you can turn off the feature entirely in `embrace-config.json`.

Reviewer: Would be good to update the page in our docs that comprehensively lists all options in the config file also

Author: Yes. I was going to do that on top of your PR. I'll make sure to do so before I release

If you wish to only have the instrumentation enabled for a subset of Activities, you can do so by disabling all by default and enabling it for a select few. Alternatively, you can enable the feature for all Activities by default and then disable it for a select few.

- Disabling all Activity load instrumentation

> 	- Set the configuration property `ui_load_tracing_disabled` in `embrace-config.json` in the section `sdk_config`.`automatic_data_capture` to `true`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
	- Set the configuration property `ui_load_tracing_disabled` in `embrace-config.json` in the section `sdk_config.automatic_data_capture` to `true`
```

Author: Haha I was being fancy here

- Explicitly enabling select Activities

> 	- Set the configuration property `ui_load_tracing_selected_only` in `embrace-config.json` in the section `sdk_config`.`ui_load_tracing_selected_only` to `true`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
	- Set the configuration property `ui_load_tracing_selected_only` in `embrace-config.json` in the section `sdk_config.ui_load_tracing_selected_only` to `true`
```
